Hello everyone and welcome to the third video
in the Object Oriented Programming section of this course.
In this course we're going to dive deeper into methods.
So I've used that term methods
and you can think of it as basically when you're
constructing the function syntaxes within that class,
that D-E-F,
and to put it more formally, you can think of methods
not just as functions to find inside the body class,
but they're used to perform operations
with the attributes of our objects.
And methods are used in the encapsulation concept
of the Object Oriented Programming paradigm.
And encapsulation, basically, allows you to
divide responsibilities in programming
and it allows you to handle really large applications.
So, for the most part, you can basically
think of methods as functions acting on the object
that take the object itself into account
through that self argument.
So what we're gonna do now is create a circle class.
Or a circle object, using the class keyword.
And we're gonna be using a tonne of methods
and this should really drive home a lot of
what we've been learning about
as far as objects, methods, and instantiation.
So I'm gonna create a class
called Circle.
Capital c.
I pass in the object as a keyword.
And now I put pass.
So we have our really basic circle class.
So what do I wanna do first?
If you remember from the last video
we had class object attributes.
And that was the species class object attribute
for that dog class.
So remember all dogs are mammals.
So we would put that first.
So here I'm gonna put any,
remember, class
object
attributes.
So something that's true for any instance of the class.
So what's true for circles?
Well, for circles
in general we know pi is always a constant, right?
And so I'm gonna put, as a class object attribute,
pi is equal to 3.14.
And I'm gonna actually embed that into the circle class.
Now, it doesn't make a whole lotta sense
that pi is part of the circle but it's nice
that we can have it as an instance
of this class object attribute.
To show that it's the same no matter what kind of circle
or how large of a circle you're building.
So I've rounded it off to the .14 two decimal places.
And now what I'm gonna do is get started with,
remember, our special method the first one.
This underscore underscore I-N-I-T.
This initiation method.
Remember I always put in self
whenever I'm putting a method inside a class.
And let's just say pass here.
And let's go ahead and make a circle called c.
Okay, so we have our circle. Super simple.
So what do we want to add to this circle?
Well we know circles have a radius, right?
Now a radius would be an attribute of a circle.
So I'm gonna put in radius.
And by default I'll set the radius equal to one.
So in case I don't pass a radius
it'll automatically set that to one.
So now I'll say self.radius,
the attribute of the circle, is equal to radius.
Okay.
So now if I have my circle.
I just ran all three of these cells.
If I put tab I can ask for pi from the circle
and it'll always give me back 3.14
no matter how big the circle is.
And now I can also ask for tab radius.
And the radius of this circle is one.
Now I could have made another circle
of a radius of whatever I wanted.
Maybe 100.
And note now when I run that cell
and ask for the radius it gives me 100.
But when I ask for pi,
still, since it's a class object attribute defined outside
of any of these methods so far
it's gonna be the same
no matter what other attributes the object has.
Okay.
So now let's start another
method.
So again, methods are basically functions within
an object that have a reference to the object itself.
So let's make a method that calculates the area of a circle.
So I'll call this def area
and I always pass in the self arguments.
And so what is the area of a circle?
Well the area of circle will be,
and I'm gonna put in in comments here,
it's gonna be the radius squared.
Right?
Multiplied, I'll put an asterisk here, by pi.
Pi r squared is the radius of a circle.
Or, excuse me, is the area of a circle.
So, if I ask for
the area of my Circle object
I'm going to want to return
radius
squared
times pi.
But remember, radius isn't clear enough for
Python here.
It needs to know which radius.
And that's why I'm going to input self.radius.
Since radius isn't actually defined anywhere
except as a class attribute.
So self.radius lets Python know,
hey, take the radius, or this attributes,
of this current object.
And we can do the same with pi.
And now this will work well.
And actually, excuse me, for this self to stop pi,
remember, it's not a normal attribute
it's a class object attribute.
So it's actually gonna call from Circle.
So if I run that.
Create a circle for radius 100.
Now I can ask for its area.
Close parenthesis since this is a method not an attribute.
And it returns the area for me.
Okay, so let's break down what's actually happening here.
From the top. I have my class.
Capitalised Circle. Pass an object.
We have class object attributes.
These are referenced for any instance of Circle.
It'll always have these be true.
So Circle.pi will always be 3.14. Okay.
Then I have my init, this special method,
which initiates all the attributes of my class.
And in this case I only have one other than self.
Which is the radius.
And then I have a method within my class as well.
Which looks just like a function.
And in this case it only takes in the self arguments.
And it's gonna be the radius squared times pi.
So I'm gonna return the self.radius, this attribute,
squared times this class object attribute.
Which is Circle.pi. Okay, perfect.
So now let's go ahead and build
on top of what we're thinking about.
And let's say I wanted to reset the radius.
How would I do that?
I could make another method.
I'll call it set_radius.
It'll take self as an argument.
And it will also take, let's call this,
new_radius as an argument.
And what is this gonna do?
It's gonna be a method you can call in your circle,
set_radius, that takes in an argument.
A new radius.
And then it will reset its self.radius attribute.
And the way we can do that is just by saying self dot--
Self.radius is then equal to that new radius.
Okay, so I ran that cell.
So now let's make a circle, c, that has a radius of 10.
Let's go ahead and check its area.
314.
And now if you notice I have this set radius.
And
if I put shift-tab tells me the type, string form, file.
I can actually add a docstring in here
just like I could for a function.
And say
this method
takes in a radius
and resets the
current radius of the circle.
Okay, perfect.
Let's go ahead and
take that.
Run that cell.
Create the circle. Check its area again.
And now if I click shift-tab here
you'll notice I can expand it.
Get the definition and see this method,
the docstring there, that I wrote.
Perfect. Okay.
So now set_radius. What's my current radius?
Well, I have c right?
And I can check its attribute.
Its current radius is 10.
So I'm going to use my new method I just created
to set the radius
to, let's say, 20.
And now if I check the radius of my circle
it's set to 20.
So, that's how we're basically building out
our own methods for the objects we're able to create.
And one more.
Let's just say we wanted a method for getting radius.
That was strictly a method not an attribute.
I could just say something like get_radius.
Remember all methods within a class
have to take self as an argument.
And I will just return self.radius.
So this is essentially the same as just calling radius.
But I just wanna make it explicitly a method
instead of an attribute.
So I'm gonna create in Circle again.
Check the area.
It's radius
is 10.
And I can also now use get_radius
to get the same number out.
Notice how radius, since it's an attribute,
doesn't have the parentheses.
But since get_radius is a method
it does need these parentheses to signify
I'm not passing in any arguments.
Okay.
So, I want you to notice how we use
the self notation throughout this class
to reference attributes of the class
within the method calls.
And go ahead and review how the code above works
by creating your own methods.
So what I want you to do is to make sure
you fully understand this,
is create a new method here
called def
perimeter.
It'll take in self.
And I want you to fill in the code here
that returns the perimeter of the circle.
That will be the method.
And then what I also want you to do
is instead of creating a method
see if you'd be able to take perimeter in as an attribute.
How would you do that?
See if you'd be able to somehow, either,
calculate it or reset it based on
what the radius in that class object attribute was.
So see if you could say self.perimeter.
What would you put in here? Question mark.
To make that work. Okay.
So I know we just went over a lot.
And we're gonna go over it just as a basic rundown.
But really take your time with this.
I know it's hard and I know it's confusing.
But it'll eventually click.
So don't worry if you're still a little confused
on what's actually going on.
So just to cover what we did in this lecture.
We went over methods.
And generally you can think of methods
as just functions defined inside the body of a class
that take in a self argument so they know
they're referring to the object class.
So here we have what's known as a special method.
This underscore underscore init underscore underscore.
It always takes in self.
And then it takes in any parameters you want
to initialise that version of your object.
In this case Circle.
Before that we put in any class object attributes we want.
And those are attributes that will be the same
for any instance of this circle class or circle object.
And then, nitty gritty, the methods themselves.
Here we've created a method called area
that just returns the area of the circle
based on, both, an attribute and a class object attribute.
Then we created a method called set_radius
and we created a docstring for this one
and said this method takes in a radius
and resets the current radius of the circle.
Again it always takes in self.
And in this case it took in new_radius as an argument.
And it just reset the attribute radius to the new radius.
Okay.
And what I want you to do is go ahead
and create a new method for getting the perimeter out.
And then I also want you to see,
how would you do that if you just wanted
to do the attribute version?
Just set perimeter as a straight up attribute
since the beginning.
Okay.
So again, take your time with this.
And I'd like to emphasise that at the bottom
of this Jupiter notebook, I know I said this
in the first lecture of this section,
but there's some great resources here.
These four are very good for continuing
your understanding of Object Oriented Programming.
How classes work.
And usually you have to see it explained
a couple of different ways for it to really click.
Alright, so that's it for this lecture.
In the next lecture what we're gonna be doing
is going over inheritance.
Which is a way to form new classes
using classes that have already been defined.
Okay, thanks, and I'll see you at the next lecture.